---
layout: posts
title: "Harari - Brief Histories"
---


## Sapiens - A Brief History of Humankind
### Harper, 2014

## Homo Deus - A Brief History about Tomorrow
### Harvill Secker, 2015

### by Yuval Noah Harari.

<!-- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -->
<!-- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -->

## I.

Harari is a great narrator and his subject is the grandest story of
all. It commences 70 000 years ago with, what he calls, the *cognitive
revolution* of Homo Sapiens, runs to the presence in his first book,
and extends into the future as based on what we know of
humankind and current trends. He excels in identifying the critical
aspects for the long term development trends and, like a bold artist, he paints with a big
brush long lines that usually hit the mark and make the reader
see the big connections.

The cognitive revolution took place approximately 70 000 years ago.
The core of the cognitive revolution was the development of
inter-subjectivity, which is a group phenomena and denotes
the creation of a reality that is not valid outside of the group, but for
the members of that group it is as real as stones, elephants, hunger
and gravity. Inter-subjectivity allows the creation of stories that
bind the group together, allows it to synchronize 
activities and to collaborate with group members, that do not know
each other intimately or even personally. Inter-subjective reality,
mostly labeled as *fiction*, in Harari's words, 


> enabled us not merely to imagine things, but to do so
> *collectively*. We can weave common myths such as the biblical
> creation story, the Dreamtime myths of Aboriginal Australians, and
> the nationalist myths of modern states. Such myths give Sapiens the
> unprecedented ability to cooperate flexibly in large numbers. Ants
> and bees can also work together, but they do so in a very rigid
> manner and only with close relatives. [...] Sapiens can cooperate in
> extremely flexible ways with countless numbers of strangers. That's
> why Sapiens rules the world, whereas ants eat our leftovers and
> chimps are locked up in zoos and research laboratories.

<!-- \cite[page 25]{harari:14a}  -->

Before the cognitive revolution
Sapiens, not unlike its great ape cousins,
could collaborate in small bands of extended family where the bonds
were based on smell, touch and an intimate joint history of mutual
dependencies. All individuals in the group knew each other well and
trusted each other based on mutual credence and reciprocal favors.

The construction of an inter-subjective reality, mediated by language,
allowed people to cooperate based on their believe in a common story.


>   The Cognitive Revolution is accordingly the point when history
>   declared its independence from biology. Until the Cognitive
>   Revolution, the doings of all human species belonged to the realm of
>   biology [...] From the Cognitive Revolution onwards, historical
>   narratives replace biological theories as our primary means of
>   explaining the development of *Homo Sapiens*. To understand the
>   rise of Christianity or the French Revolution, it is not enough to
>   comprehend the interaction of genes, hormons and organisms. It is
>   necessary to take into account the interaction of ideas, images and
>   fantasies as well.

<!-- \cite[page 37]{harari:14a} -->

Fueled by the ability to collaborate in large bands of hundreds of
people, Sapiens went out of Africa and conquered the world from Europe
to China and Australia. Everywhere its ascendance transformed the
landscape, fauna and flora. Sapiens

>   drove to extinction all the other human species
>   of the world, 90 per cent of the large animals of Australia, 75 per
>   cent of the large mammals of America and about 50 per cent of all
>   the large land mammals of the planet - and all before they planted
>   the first wheat field, shaped the first metal tool, wrote the first
>   text or struck the first coin.

<!-- \cite[page 87]{harari:2015a}} -->

According to Harari the ability to create inter-subjective reality has
been a defining force in the formation of all societies up to the
present day. As examples of common stories of inter-subjective
realities that form the pillars of societies Harari names all modern
religions, money, laws and the rule by law, and human rights. All
these are social constructs that only work, because sufficiently many
people believe in them. But once they have been accepted in a society,
they are as real as any physical object and nobody can ignore them
without suffering severe consequences. For instance, the property law of my
country prohibits me to cut down my neighbor's tree. That only
works if sufficiently many people believe in it: my neighbor, the
police, the judge, and the lawyers. If nobody believed in that law, it
would be nil and I could freely cut down the tree with my
chainsaw. Nobody would care except perhaps my neighbor. However, if
everybody believes in a shared story of property ownership,
borders, and law enforcement, I have no choice other than to accept
this story. If I do not accept it, I would greatly suffer and gradually learn
to abide by it.

A formative power for organizing societies and prescribing the way they work in minute
detail comes with all these grand stories that Sapiens has invented:
Religions, Armies, Gods, Kings,  Money, Property, Laws, Markets, Companies,
etc. Harari's narrative talent not only brings to life how shared
imagination facilitated the organization of ancient Mesopotamian states
but also how our own modern societies crucially depend on fictional
stories in economics, law and politics.

<!-- ------------------------------------------------------------------------>
## II.

While the first book, *Sapiens*, extends from the cognitive
revolution to the presence, Harari's second book, *Homo Deus*
starts with our present situation, analyzes the grand trends and
speculates where this may lead us. The two books overlap in analyzing
today's human condition. Both look at the big picture, tell the grand,
defining stories of humanity, and draw with
astonishing accuracy the big lines that connect Sapien's past
with Deus' future.


While the big stories of the past, as elaborated in *Sapiens*,
have revolved around religion, where either the forces of nature
(Buddhism, Greek and Roman religions, ...),
the forces of society (Konfuzianism, Philosophical schools about
ethics, ...)
or a unified, abstracted god (Judaism, Christianity, Islam, ...), have
been in the center of the narrative, the central character of today's
and tomorrow's story is Homo Sapiens itself. As expanded in *Homo
Deus*, humanism is the great story of today, the modern religion. It
has as central axiom the believe that it is the individual human or
the collective of humans, that gives meaning to our world, that
defines what is good and bad. Since the individual human experience
is sacred,  it is beyond questioning that the individual's pleasure
is good and pain is bad. Everything else follows from that. We
organize our societies to minimize the pain and maximize the
well-being of individuals. Pain and suffering of a person is only
acceptable, either if it cannot be avoided, or if it minimizes
other people's suffering such that the net outcome is less
suffering. It is due to Harari's great talent as narrator to
convincingly bring out that this is a premises of modern times and
other ages have been far more indifferent to pleasure and pain of
individuals.

Harari distinguishes three branches of
the humanist religion, the liberal humanism, social humanism, and
evolutionary humanism.
The orthodox, liberal humanism

>   holds that each human being is a unique individual possessing a
>   distinctive inner voice and a never-to-be-repeated series if
>   experiences. Every human being is a singular ray of light that
>   illuminates the world from a different perspective, and that adds
>   color, depth and meaning to the universe. Hence we ought to give as
>   much freedom as possible to every individual to experience the
>   world, follow his or her inner voice and express his or her inner
>   truth. Whether in politics, economics or art, individual free will
>   should have far more weight than state interests or religious doctrines.

Social humanism contends that the main flaw of liberal humanism is
that an individual's self and feeling is not independent and unaltered
by the environment but that it rather depends on and evolves in a
social context. To understand an individual's feeling, preferences and
anxieties is only possible based on the social context, her social and
family history, her peers, her schools and teachers. Thus if one
really values the individual person, it is paramount to get the social
context right, to provide for a caring society, to improve the
educational system, and to fairly balance entitlements, obligations
and responsibilities.

Evolutionary humanism, with the Nazis as best known proponents, has a
different solution for the well fare of humans. Not social engineering
can improve the human condition but an evolutionary process of
competition and selection between individuals, nations and races will
eventually lead to ever more improved humans. While the Nazi sect of
evolutionary humanism has largely been discredited, the vision to
continuously enhance and evolve the biological basis of humans may
celebrate a come back in the form of bio- and genetic engineering. In
fact, that is one of three tracks to enhance Sapiens to Homo Deus.

>  The upgrading of humans into gods may follow any of
>   three paths: biological engineering, cyborg engineering and the
>   engineering of non-organic beings.

<!-- \cite[page 50]{harari:2015a}} -->

The second half of *Homo Deus* explores these tracks of possible
developments for future humans and techno-human societies. It also
considers carefully the possibilities, that humans first loose control
of and then value for a future society dominated by cyborgs and
artificial intelligence. While still well narrated, this part of the
book is less convincing because it offers more speculations then
ingenious discernment. Harari is at his best as historian conveying deep
insights and astute wisdom about the human history and condition.

As both books present a compelling story full of clear-sighted observations and
vivid illustrations of grand connections, this review cannot do full
justice to the many gems hidden within the 900 odd pages. For
instance, the account of the agricultural revolution as the ``biggest
fraud in history'' is an unforgettable take-away for me.
On one hand the fact that Sapiens can invent and enforce shared
stories to form inter-subjective realities is, according to Harari,
the basis of all cultural progress and development, the basis of all
human societies. He gives examples where some stories won out over
others, not because they are more accurate or a better match to
reality, but because they were a better instrument to coordinate
people's actions. For instance,

>   Yet even though Horodotus and Thycidides understood reality much
>   better then the authors of the Bible, when the two world views
>   collided, the Bible won by a knock-out. The Greeks adopted the
>   jewish view of history, rather than vice versa. A thousand years
>   after Thucydides, the Greeks became convinced that if some barbarian
>   horde invaded, surely it was divine punishmentr for their sins. No
>   matter how mistaken the biblical world view was, it provided a
>   better basis for large-scale human cooperation.

<!-- \cite[page 2013]{harari:2015a} -->

Only sometimes Harari gets carried away by his own storytelling and misses the
necessary rigor and scrutiny. The notion of *story* is central to both
books.

<!-- ------------------------------------------------------------------------>
## III.

However, his is also a great story, presumably explaining
the big developments of Homo Sapiens during the last 70000 years. So
one wonders if his story is compelling because it closely matches
reality and describes real causalities, or if it is a powerful
illustration that appeals to the natural imagination of the
reader. When reading the books, I wished at several points that Harari
had scrutinized the essence of the power of stories, that he had
studied and explained  what
distinguishes an amusing ferry tale without consequences from a
powerfully culture forming story. To which degree are culture
forming stories rooted in reality? What exactly makes one story
winning over another? This additional level of scrutiny
and rigor would have made his own story even more comprehensive, more
compelling, and more useful. 

A central hypothesis in *Homo Deus* is the framing of
humanism as a religion, which is based on the assumptions of
individualism and the individual's free will. Harari is right to
question the rational and scientific basis of these assumptions, but
his treatment of the subject falls short of what would have been desirable
given the overarching importance of this topic and those claims for
the book.

First, Harari questions if it is correct and meaningful to talk about
*an individual*. The individual, so the story of humanism goes,
is the atomic agent of our liberal societies and of the
subjective experiences of each of us. The individual person is the
agent that has rights, obligations, citizenship, owns property, has
responsibilities, is liable, can be punished and rewarded. If the
individual as an acting, deciding, resource consuming, happiness
pursuing agent does not exist, there is not much in the formational
conventions of our societies that still makes sense. Harari throws
into question the validity of the concept "individual" with evidence
from clinical observations and neuro-science. His central argument rests
on studies of split-brain patients. The human brain's neocortex
consists of two main parts, a left and a right hemisphere that are
connected by massive bundles of neuron fibers forming communication
highways, that exchange vast amounts of information and seem to play a key role in integrating the brains
activity into one mind. In rare cases of epilepsy these communication
bundles have been cut to suppress the hazardous distribution
of chaotic epileptic activities through the brain. While containing
the symptoms of epilepsy, in some patients the effect has been the
emergence of two separate personalities who could be observed to
behave differently. In intriguing experiments
questions have been posed to the two separated hemispheres and different answers
have been received. These experiments exploited the fact that the left
hemisphere controls the right visual field and the right hand, while
the right hemisphere controls the left visual field and the left
hand. From these experiments and similar evidence Harari concludes
that there is little point in talking about an atomic individual
because obviously in every brain there are multiple cognitive
processes that operate partially independently from each other and
only generate the delusion of an indivisible individual person.

This argument seems shallow. An individual's personality is an
*emergent system property* of the whole brain that cannot be
reduced to any of its parts. System properties disappear or are profoundly altered when the system is cut
into smaller pieces. We know that the brain consists of many modular
and concurrently active processes that cooperate, synchronize and
communicate to produce thoroughly integrated behavior. Healthy
humans never execute conflicting decisions and all basic activities
such as walking, writing, talking, driving, playing, etc. are tightly
synchronized and integrated. Just because we can observe meaningful
actions from brain modules when the integration at the system level is
inhibited in injured brains, does not mean that there is no integration
and system property in the healthy brain. Just because two violently
separated parts of an ant colony are still acting in a meaningful way,
does not mean that the undivided ant colony does not act as one
integrated ant colony system.

A more promising attack on the concept "individual"  would have been
from the level above, the social group of individuals. Science
informs us that individuals are formed and influenced in zillion ways
by the social environment around them, during childhood and throughout
live. In fact the influence of the social context on the individual
person's formation and characteristics is so deep and wide, that there
is hardly an individual character left if the social context is
removed. What would be the character of a person, who had never
encountered another human? His or her character would be so profoundly
different, that we can not even imagine it. Thus, the activities of an
individual depends so profoundly on the social environment during
formation and for each and every decision taken through lifetime, that
one can justifiably question if it is warranted to attribute
responsibility, punishment, reward, or ownership of resources to
individuals without taking into account the current and formative
social context. Hence, while Harari's conclusion  that the individual
may not be a solid foundation for humanism and liberal societies, his
arguments are based on pathological cases and hence unnecessarily weak.

Similarly central to our notions of humanism and liberalism 
is the endowment of the individual with free will. How can
we hold a person responsible for his or her actions, if there is no
free will? The whole legal code and our political system of democracy
and civil participation is based on the assumption of free will and
accountability. However, Harari argues, there is really no possibility
for a free will if you take science and physics seriously. If all
molecules, neuron cells and chemical processes in the brain abide by
the laws of physics, all actions and decisions of the brain are
determined by these laws. There is no way that some obscure process
could interfere, violate the natural laws, inject a free will and
alter the sequence of actions. Even if the laws of physics are not
deterministic as some interpretations of quantum mechanics suggest,
Harari continues, free will is not possible because even a stochastic
result of a physical process based on the probability distributions
prescribed by quantum mechanics cannot be altered at will. Any
measurable effect of a ``free will''  would violate the laws of
physics. And if it is not measurable it has no consequence.

Here Harari is on more solid ground but he fails to elaborate some subtleties that are of
utmost importance for his conclusions. Even if we assume for the sake
of the argument that the physical laws are purely deterministic, it
does not mean there is no choice. A deterministic world where each and
every action at any time is fully defined by the current state can
still allow choice. To see this, consider your navigation system in
your car. If you select a target address that navigator will identify
several possible routes which are differentiated by the length, the
estimated traveling time, the aesthetics of the views and other
characteristics. If you define your objective as reaching your destination
as soon as possible, the navigator will select the fastest route which
may not be the shortest or the most scenic. If your objective is to
minimize fuel consumption, the navigator will pick the shortest
route. Thus, if we assume that the car's engine, gears and wheels all
follow strictly deterministic laws of physics, the navigator will
still consider different choices and select the one that meets your
objectives best. Hence, the navigator has choices to select without
violating deterministic physical laws. If we include the objectives in
our consideration, we see that the navigator will in fact act fully
deterministic by selecting the same route for a given destination and
a given objective.

The human decision process works similarly although
it considers many more options and objectives. There are the
objectives of survival, obtaining food, reproduction, earning money,
and visiting a relative at 6pm, among others. If you for now conclude
that the last one is most important, because it is 5:30pm, your
decision process  will consider the options you have, and you will select the one that meets best
your objectives. So like the navigator you do have choices to select
from and you will select the option that seems to be best for you. How
do you know what is best for you? You do not have precise knowledge
but you make an assessment that most of the time works pretty well. It
is based on you genetic disposition and on the experience you have
made earlier in your life. If you have experienced a traumatic car
accident you may conclude, that driving slower is better, which may
influence the selection of the route. If you have been in contact with
law enforcement procedures before, because you have cut down your
neighbor's tree, you may conclude that cutting down another tree is
not the best route of action for you. Thus, assigning
responsibilities to individuals, reward them if they abide by rules
and punish them if they don't, shape the individual's assessment of
possible actions and thus influences the decisions taken. So it turns
out that in a fully deterministic world it makes a lot of sense to
formulate laws, and hand out rewards and punishments to individuals
who have no free will.

Even though Harari's premises of a deterministic world may be correct,
his conclusion that the concept of free will is a worthless delusion,
may not, which eventually jeopardizes all his further arguments about
humanism as modern religion and the future path our societies may
take. Regrettably, Harari does not diverge into these subtleties which
limits the scope and depth of his reasoning, and
the conclusions that he proposes to the reader come with the doubt
that some additional healthy rigidity may have changed them.

But again, these are minor flaws in a barrel of gems and some shortcomings in the story line notwithstanding, 
this narrative about the past and possible future of humanity is
enticing, thrilling and, by and large, convincing.


(AJ May 2018)
