---
layout: posts
title: "The Survival of the Friendliest"
---


## The Survival of the Friendliest
### Understanding Our Origins and Rediscovering Our Common Humanity
### Random House, New York, 2020

### by Brain Hare and Vanessa Woods

<!-- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -->
<!-- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -->

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/Friendliest-1.jpg"
    description=""  width="300px"
    align="right" %}

The authors present the *self-domestication hypothesis* as supposedly
the central evolutionary event that took place 70-80 thousand years ago
and transformed homo sapiens from just another homo to a world
conquering species.  *Domestication* is the process when tolerance of
humans is selected for by evolutionary pressure. It is commonly
accepted that for instance dogs have evolved over many generations
from their wolf ancestors by this process. Those individuals that
tolerated humans better, that were *friendlier* towards humans, stayed
consistently closer to human communities, benefited from the
left-overs of human hunting and farming activities and therefore mated
more often than not with other individuals close to a human
group. Over many generations this process developed a species that
eventually lived together with humans bands and became part of their
communities.

This process has also created all other domesticated  animals like
pigs, cows, goats, sheep, etc. Curiously it comes together with a
number of other, seemingly non related traits like loss of pigments,
curly tails, floppy ears, smaller brains, and the ability for longer
breeding seasons. The process can be thought to generalize to other
species, not only humans, and it can also work with the same species
as target, which is then called *self-domestication*. Bonobos may have
domesticated themselves. They are very similar to chimpanzees with the
main difference that they act much more tolerant towards all other
bonobos. While chimpanzees regularly are aggressive against each other
and routinely kill other chimpanzees who are not from their own band,
bonobos have never been observed to kill other bonobos, neither in the
wild nor in a Zoo. The book explains how reduced aggressiveness may
have become an evolutionary advantage which over time increased and
then led to consistently friendly inter-species relations.

The self-domestication hypothesis contends that a similar process
brought about a highly significant change of behavior to homo sapiens
about 70-80 thousand years ago.  While before that time homo sapiens
was fairly similar to other members of the homo family such as the
Neandertals, Homo erectus, or homo floresiensis, fairly unremarkable
and fairly unsuccessful, after this change it quickly spread to all
corners of the planet and drove extinct not only all other hominin
species but dozens of other large vertebrates either by competition or
by over-hunting. Fascinatingly, because domestication goes together
with change of traits in the body and bone structure, as mentioned
above, it can be traced in the archaeological record. And that record
seems to give support to this hypothesis.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/Friendliest-2.jpg"
    description=""  width="300px"
    align="right" %}

Self-domestication has increased the tolerance
towards other humans outside the narrow group or family.
Early humans and probably most other hominins lived in bands of a up
to a few dozen members where everybody intimately new every other
individual by sight, smell and touch. Members of other bands were not
tolerated and if possible killed or driven away. But
self-domestication led to an increased tolerance towards outsiders,
that facilitated communication and collaboration. This ability to
collaborate with strangers proved to be extremely powerful because it
facilitated long distance trade routes and complex, differentiated
societies that consisted of hundreds or thousands of members, living
over large areas. Hence, humans could cooperate with strangers even
though they may not have met each other.

The change that was brought about by self-domestication concerns the
criteria by which a friend is recognized. In other hominin groups and
in today's groups of chimpanzees and apes the criteria are 
touch and smell and having lived with one another over an
extended period. It relies upon intimate knowledge of each other and
being close to each other over long periods of time. This limits the
number of individuals that can belong to one group and it makes it
difficult that a stranger becomes accepted as a friend. And if a
stranger from another group becomes a friend, he or she cannot
continue to be part of the other group anymore. But with
self-domestication the criteria for friendship became more flexible,
almost arbitrary and much easier to pass. It could be a specific color of
the hair, a particular type of weapon,  a specific symbol worn around
the neck, or a dialect of the language. It could be different for
different groups and it could depend on whatever was best suited for a
particular purpose such as to be distinguishable from another group, to
make trade networks work, or to conduct  a big hunt. This increased
flexibility in forming groups of friends unleashed the enormous
potential of nearly unlimited cooperation. Indeed, today there are
societies with over a billion members that consider themselves
connected, and it is quite conceivable that this number may one day
become as large as ten billion.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/Brian_Hare_2010.jpg"
    description="Brian Hare, professor of evolutionary anthropology at
    Duke University, <a
    href='https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=84573038'>by
    PopTech, CC BY-SA 2.0</a>" width="300px"
    align="left" %}

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/Vanessa_Woods.jpg"
    description="Vanessa Woods, an Australian science writer<a
    href='https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=7779416'>, 
    by Vanessawoods - Own work, Public Domain,</a>"  width="300px"
    align="right" %}

This self-domestication proved exceedingly successful in cooperation,
building culture and technology, but it did not go all the way as in
bonobos. While bonobos treat all strangers as potential friends,
humans do not. They have maintained the notion of friend-group and
enemy-group. Although the increase of flexibility in selecting the
distinguishing criteria allowed to expand the friend-group to the size
of millions and even billions, it did not eliminate the ability to
identify enemy-groups. In fact, this ability seems not to have
weakened and is probably as strong as it is in chimpanzees. The book
elaborates this aspect quite extensively and describes some of the
mechanisms at work. It makes a deliberate attempt to link our
distance evolutionary past with the politics of the day.

The book is easy to read and self-domestication is certainly a highly
interesting hypothesis. Sometimes I wished some more details were
given and arguments were more carefully developed. For instance I
found the claim that "self-control" depends directly on the brain size
not at all compelling. At least the arguments for this connection
were not elaborated. Also, I would have loved to learn, how well this
hypothesis is accepted in the scientific community and which
alternative hypotheses are entertained.

These rather minor limitations notwithstanding I enjoyed reading the
book because it illuminates one fascinating aspect of the evolution of
our species.

(AJ September 2020)

<br>
