---
layout: posts
title: "The Dawn of Eurasia"
---


## The Dawn of Eurasia
### Penguin, 2018

### by Bruno Maçães.

<!-- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -->
<!-- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -->

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/Eurasia-2-rs.jpg"
    description=""  width="200px"
    align="left" %}

The focus of this book is the diversity and  unity of the
continent Eurasia and the author's thesis is, that the world politics
of the next decades will be defined by what is happening on that
continent, and that it is best understood by looking at Eurasia as a whole,
rather than at any of its regions in isolation. Maçães very much agrees that
the continent is diverse and even that no convergence is in
sight, but he contends that the political dynamics is best understood
by considering how the main regions interact with each other. It is
the system, consisting of diverse parts, that determines the
development, not any of the main players by itself, because none of
them is expected to dominate in the foreseeable future.

For a popular politics book the technique of narration is
unusual. Rather than presenting a thesis and marshaling the
arguments in favor, the book is structured as a traveling report.
Maçães seems to be a diligent traveler who takes his time to indulge
into the local culture and interact with whoever he happens to
meet. His itinerary starts at the center of the continent, in
Azerbaijan and the Caucasus, where he finds that the division between
east and west, Europe and Asia is not perceived as such because the
region has always been exposed to influences from all corners of the
continent. Throughout the long history of the region, peoples have
moved through, conquerors have invaded, great empires have emerged
and vanished. The population is very diverse tracing its origin to
remote places to the south, east and west. The region around the
Caspian see seems always to have been connected to the steppe peoples
to the east and as far away as China, to India, the Persian and Arabic
cultures to the south and Europe to the West.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/Eurasia-1-rs.jpg"
    description=""  width="300px" 
    align="right" %}

Maçães continues his trip
eastwards through Kazakhstan, who perceives itself to always have been
in the center, to Khorgas at the Kazakh-Chinese border. Khorgas is a
quickly growing trading city that plays an important role in China's
road and belt initiative and links Xinjiang to Kasakhstan, China to
Pakistan and eventually Europe. The Road and Belt is a huge
infrastructure program that attempts to coat Eurasia with rail and
road connections, with ports and trading posts, with pipelines and
power lines, that will eventually pull the continent ever closer
together. Europe and China two of the three biggest economies
are located at opposite ends of the continent, are drawn to each other
with inescapable attraction, even though their perception and
understanding of themselves, of each other and the world could hardly be
more distinct.

Maçães view is that China has a long term strategy, which is
politically motivated and with the objective to increase its influence
and safeguard its development, minimize external constraints and
maximize its independence and its set of options. Europe is slow to
respond to this challenge because it relies almost exclusively on a
rule-based approach that fails to constrain others but constrains
itself to the point, where it can make hardly any decisions anymore,
even when quick and bold actions are urgently needed. Europe's rule
based approach works when it deals with partners that are weak and
strongly attracted to Europe like the countries in Eastern and
southern Europe. But it fails when faced with other strong actors that
refuse to negotiate rules and, most importantly, refuse  to be
constrained by rules, like Russia and China.

Historically all civilizations and countries on the Eurasian continent
were faced with the *Western Question*. When Europe  set out on the
path of modernization a few centuries ago, its technological prowess
and organizational skills soon surpassed all its competitors on the
continent and each country, Russia, Japan, China, India, Persia, Egypt,
etc. had two choices which were hotly debated in each of those and
many other countries around the world. Should they look back at their
own history, identify the core strength of their civilizations,
cherish and develop them to face up to these aggressive Europeans with
their superior military technologies? Or should they learn from the
aggressors, find out what was their secret, adopt some or most of
the foreign customs and culture, like science, education, religion,
political organization, business practices, and so own, to stand a
chance in the competition? Each country labored with this question
under great pains and came up with its  own peculiar set of solutions, which
in most cases had to be revisited and revised after it failed. Some
countries have been successful in finding a working model relatively
quickly, like Japan, for others it took a century longer, like China,
and many other are still not content with the answer to this question
they have found and tried. 

After having visited China and considered briefly India's growing role
at the southern edge of the continent, Maçães turns his steps and
attention towards Russia. For several centuries Russia has
given different answers to the *Western
Question*. It has sometimes tried to learn from
Europe, adopt its culture and thinking, and catch up with Europe's
fast progress in science and technology, only to move away again like
a huge pendulum, putting itself into the opposite position, assert its own
history and culture, and accentuate the differences rather than the
shared traits. Today it faces two formidable neighbors in China and
Europe, the former becoming more assertive and self-confident by the
day due to its exponentially growing economic clout and intimidating
population size. The latter, even though its peak of influence and
power has passed long ago is still convinced of its 
superiority, has three times Russia's population size and four times
its economy. This leaves Russia in an unpleasant situation, squeezed
between two bigger neighbors, both overly self-confident and economic
and demographic trajectories developing to their advantages. But
Russia has a vast landmass, is strategically well positioned, commands
enormous natural resources and will benefit from climate change in
contrast to its neighbors to the east, west and south. Most importantly, its
mind set and view upon the world is poorly understood by its
neighbors, in particular its neighbor to the West. In contrast to
Europe, Russia has little interest in a stable, predicable state of
affairs. It prefers high dynamics and rocky developments, because it
expects more opportunities and benefits at the boundary of chaos. The
Russian state and its president interact with their partners and foes, just
like they deal with their own population. They have no interest in
stable, reliable rules but prefer to surprise others, break the rules
and inject chaos in well measured doses. 

Returning to Europe  Maçães muses that Eurasia's once dominant region
becomes more and more the object of politics and the victim of
developments because it abstains from asserting influence on the other
parts of the continent. As it foregoes a more active role it
becomes increasingly passive and constrained. Since its rule based
approach does not really work with the likes of Turkey, Russia or
China, it becomes defensive and disconnects politically. This approach
is bound to fail as the war in Syria, the migrant crisis, the
financial crisis, and essentially any other crisis demonstrate that
emerge somewhere on the continent.

The sole super power is curiously absent from this contemplation
about current and future world politics. Only in the epilogue  Maçães
turns his attention to America. He does not deny that the USA is the
most powerful nation but he observes that, foreign policy attention is focused
predominantly on Eurasia. The USA's world politics can be understood
as a *"high precision compass that tracks this center of gravity and
adopts its foreign policy accordingly"* (p. 260). With "center" he
means the global economy's center of gravity. He notes how this center
of gravity moves (p. 260):

> In the three decades after 1945, this center of gravity was located
>  somewhere in the middle of the Atlantic, reflecting how Europe and
>  North America dominated the world's economy. By the turn of the
>  century, however, this point has shifted so much that it was now
>  located east of the borders of the European Union. Between ten
>  years we should find it east of the border between Europe and Asia,
>  and by the middle of this century, most likely somewhere between
>  India and China.

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/Eurasia-4.jpg"
    description=""  width="200px"
    align="left" %}

{% include image.html url="/assets/images/Eurasia-5.jpg"
    description=""  width="200px"
    align="right" %}


So even though the USA is the dominating power with regard to
technology, military, and economy, it is just one more player on the
Eurasian Continent where the action is and where the fate of the world
is determined.

Thus, what  Maçães means with the dawn of Eurasia is not an emerging
superpower, but a theater of a diverse set of actors, which will not
converge or adopt each others culture and world view anytime soon, but
are nonetheless bound to each other by a common geography, a common
economic space, and a shared communication infrastructure. Certainly,
Maçães has a point and it is worth to keep an eye on Eurasia.

<!-- 
{% include image.html url="/assets/images/Eurasia-3-rs.jpg"
    description=""  width="200px"
    align="left" %}
-->

(AJ May 2020)

<br>
